.TH UDR 1 "July 2026" "udr v1.4.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
udr \- Universal Dependency Resolver — cross-ecosystem dependency management
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B udr
[\fI\-\-version\fR] [\fI\-\-help\fR] [\fI\-\-offline\fR]
\fI<command>\fR [\fI<args>\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBUniversal Dependency Resolver (UDR)\fR resolves, locks, and manages
dependencies across 25+ package ecosystems (PyPI, npm, Crates.io, Go Modules,
Maven, NuGet, RubyGems, Conda, Packagist, Homebrew, CocoaPods, Pub, Gradle,
Swift, Hex, Haskell, Nix, Guix, Vcpkg, Conan, Docker, Helm, Terraform,
APT, APK, and more).
.P
UDR uses a multi-strategy solver architecture (PubGrub, Z3 SAT solver, DFS
backtracking with forward checking, or hybrid AutoSolver) to produce
consistent, reproducible lock files. It features CUDA-aware conflict
resolution, platform marker filtering (PEP 508), cross-compilation targeting,
offline-first indexed caches, per-ecosystem solver isolation, and a content-
addressed integrity cache.
.P
Additional capabilities include in-place manifest updates across 18 ecosystems,
CVE scanning via the OSV database, license compliance checking (SPDX),
SBOM generation (SPDX 2.3 / CycloneDX 1.5), supply chain attestation with
Ed25519 signing, YAML-based policy enforcement, deprecation detection,
and CI drift checking.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Lock and resolution
.TP
.B lock
Auto-detect manifests in the project directory, resolve all dependencies
across ecosystems, and write a lock file (udr.lock). Supports CUDA/device
overrides, cross-compilation (\fB\-\-target\fR, \fB\-\-platform\fR),
SLSA provenance (\fB\-\-provenance\fR), Ed25519 signing (\fB\-\-sign\fR),
CI drift checking (\fB\-\-check\fR), manifest updating (\fB\-\-yes\fR),
and workspace monorepo support (\fB\-\-workspace\fR).
.TP
.B resolve
Resolve one or more packages (e.g.\& \fInumpy@pypi express@npm\fR) and
print the resolution result without writing a lock file. Supports interactive
conflict resolution, pinning, blocking, freezing, extras, and CUDA/device/
cross-compilation overrides.
.TP
.B update
Re-resolve a specific package (or all vulnerable packages with
\fB\-\-fix-cve\fR) and update the existing lock file. Supports interactive
mode, dry-run, CUDA/device overrides, cross-compilation, and workspace
monorepo support.
.TP
.B install
Install packages from a udr.lock file using each ecosystem's native
package manager (pip, npm, cargo, go, gem, etc.). Supports ecosystem-
specific filtering, dry-run, production mode (skip dev deps), CUDA wheel
selection, and cross-compilation.
.SS Inspection and analysis
.TP
.B check
Run compatibility checks against the current system or a lock file.
Use \fB\-\-cve\fR to scan for known vulnerabilities, \fB\-\-license\fR for
license compliance (SPDX), \fB\-\-deprecated\fR for deprecated/yanked
packages, \fB\-\-policy\fR for YAML policy enforcement, \fB\-\-deps\fR for
project dependency listing, and \fB\-\-device\fR/\fB\-\-cuda\fR for
simulated system checks.
.TP
.B verify
Validate a lock file: check that all pinned versions still exist in their
registries and that integrity hashes match (when
\fBPIN_INTEGRITY=true\fR). With \fB\-\-signature\fR, verify the Ed25519
signature on the lock file.
.TP
.B why
Show why a package version was selected by tracing its dependency chain
(which package required it and with what constraint). Use \fB\-\-all\fR to
display chains for every package in the lock file.
.TP
.B outdated
List packages in the lock file that have newer versions available in their
registries. Supports ecosystem filtering and JSON output.
.TP
.B diff
Compare two lock files and show added, removed, and changed packages.
Supports workspace convenience mode (\fB\-\-workspace backend\fR compares
udr.lock vs udr-backend.lock).
.TP
.B graph
Print a dependency tree or DOT-format graph for one or more packages.
Supports CUDA/device overrides and JSON output.
.SS Search and discovery
.TP
.B search
Search for packages across ecosystem registries. Supports filtering by
ecosystem and limiting results per ecosystem.
.TP
.B details
Display detailed information about a specific package: available versions,
dependencies, metadata, and deprecation status.
.TP
.B list-ecosystems
List all supported ecosystems with their display names, identifiers, and
capability categories (resolvable or query-only).
.SS Supply chain and compliance
.TP
.B sbom
Generate a Software Bill of Materials from a lock file in SPDX 2.3
(default) or CycloneDX 1.5 format. Supports workspace and custom output
file path.
.SS Authentication and keys
.TP
.B auth
Manage API keys for the UDR API server and Ed25519 signing keys for lock
file attestation.
.RS
Subcommands:
.B create
\fI\-\-name\fR \fI\-\-role\fR \fI\-\-description\fR \(em create a new API key.
.B revoke
\fI<key_id>\fR \(em revoke an API key by ID.
.B list
\(em list all API keys.
.B gen-key
\(em generate a new Ed25519 signing key pair.
.B show-key
\(em display the current Ed25519 public signing key.
.RE
.SS Offline indexes
.TP
.B index
Manage offline SQLite indexes for air-gapped environments.
.RS
Subcommands:
.B pull
\fI<url>\fR \(em download pre-built indexes.
.B build
\(em build indexes from resolved packages in udr.lock.
.B status
\(em show local offline index status.
.B sync
\fI\-\-all\fR | \fI\-\-ecosystem\fR \(em sync local indexes from remote registries.
.RE
.SS Plugin system
.TP
.B tools
Manage plugins and extensions.
.RS
Subcommands:
.B register-plugin
\fI\-\-path\fR <dir> \(em scan a directory for third-party plugins and
register them.
.RE
.SS Other
.TP
.B scan
Scan a GitHub repository or local directory for dependency manifests,
detect ecosystems, and optionally resolve and write a lock file. Supports
Github repo URL scanning, manifest-specific processing, CUDA/device
overrides, and interactive mode.
.TP
.B serve
Start the UDR API server. Supports local and SaaS modes, SSL termination,
worker process configuration, and hot-reload for development.
.TP
.B completion
Generate shell completion scripts for bash, zsh, or fish. If no shell is
specified, the shell is auto-detected.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the UDR version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print a help message and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-offline
Run in offline mode: use cached data only; no network requests are made.
Equivalent to setting the
.B UDR_OFFLINE
environment variable.
.SS Common command flags
These flags are available on multiple commands:
.TP
.B \-\-directory=\fI<dir>\fR, \-d \fI<dir>\fR
Project directory to operate in (default: current directory). Supported by
check, lock, verify, update, install, why, outdated, diff, sbom.
.TP
.B \-\-workspace=\fI<name>\fR
Workspace name for monorepo support. The lock file is resolved as
\fIudr-{workspace}.lock\fR instead of the default \fIudr.lock\fR.
Supported by lock, check, update, install, verify, diff, why, outdated,
sbom, resolve.
.TP
.B \-\-lock-file=\fI<path>\fR, \-l \fI<path>\fR
Explicit lock file path. Overrides \fB\-\-directory\fR and
\fB\-\-workspace\fR resolution. Supported by check, update, install, why,
outdated, sbom.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output results as JSON for machine parsing. Supported by lock, check,
resolve, graph, verify, outdated, diff, search, details,
list-ecosystems, why.
.TP
.B \-\-cuda=\fI<version>\fR
Target CUDA version (e.g.\& 12.1). Overrides auto-detection for GPU-
aware package resolution (e.g.\& PyTorch CUDA variants). Supported by
lock, check, resolve, graph, update, install, scan.
.TP
.B \-\-device=\fI<device>\fR
Target compute device: \fBcpu\fR, \fBcuda\fR, \fBmps\fR (Apple Silicon),
or \fBrocm\fR (AMD GPU). Supported by lock, check, resolve, graph, update,
scan.
.TP
.B \-\-target=\fI<os>\fR
Target operating system for cross-compilation: \fBlinux\fR, \fBwindows\fR,
or \fBdarwin\fR. Supported by lock, resolve, update, install.
.TP
.B \-\-platform=\fI<arch>\fR
Target CPU architecture for cross-compilation: \fBx86_64\fR, \fBaarch64\fR,
\fBarm64\fR, \fBi386\fR, or \fBamd64\fR. Supported by lock, resolve,
update, install.
.TP
.B \-\-with-dev
Include dev/optional dependency manifests during resolution. Supported by
lock, resolve, update.
.TP
.B \-\-without-optional
Exclude optional dependencies during resolution. Supported by lock,
resolve, update.
.TP
.B \-\-fix-cve
Update vulnerable packages to versions that fix known CVEs. Supported by
update.
.TP
.B \-\-sign
Sign the lock file with an Ed25519 signing key. Supported by lock.
.TP
.B \-\-provenance
Add a SLSA provenance section to the lock file. Supported by lock.
.TP
.B \-\-check, \-c
Check if the lock file is up to date (CI mode). Exits with code 0 if
current, 1 if drift is detected. Does not modify the lock file.
Supported by lock.
.TP
.B \-\-signature, \-\-sig
Verify the Ed25519 signature on a lock file. Supported by verify.
.TP
.B \-\-policy=\fI<file>\fR, \-p \fI<file>\fR
Path to a YAML policy file (default: ./udr-policy.yaml). Supported by
check.
.TP
.B \-\-dry-run
Show what would be done without modifying any files. Supported by lock,
update, install, scan.
.TP
.B \-\-interactive, \-i
Interactive mode for selecting manifests and resolving conflicts manually.
Supported by lock, resolve, update, scan.
.TP
.B \-\-timeout=\fI<seconds>\fR
Resolution timeout in seconds (default: 120). Supported by lock, resolve,
update.
.TP
.B \-\-auto-sync
Auto-sync stale local indexes before resolution. Supported by lock,
resolve.
.TP
.B \-\-pin=\fI<spec>\fR
Pin a package to an exact version, e.g.\& \fB\-\-pin 'numpy==1.24'\fR.
Repeatable. Supported by lock, resolve.
.TP
.B \-\-pin-mode=\fI<mode>\fR
Global pinning strategy: \fBnone\fR (default), \fBpatch\fR, \fBminor\fR,
or \fBexact\fR. Supported by lock, resolve.
.TP
.B \-\-block=\fI<package>\fR
Block a package from resolution, e.g.\& \fB\-\-block tensorflow\fR.
Repeatable. Supported by lock, resolve.
.TP
.B \-\-freeze
Freeze all packages at their lock-file versions. Supported by lock,
resolve.
.TP
.B \-\-extras=\fI<list>\fR
Comma-separated extras groups to activate (e.g.\& \fBdotenv,speedups\fR).
Supported by lock, resolve.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Resolve and lock dependencies in the current directory
.B udr lock
.TP
Resolve with CUDA 12.1 and JSON output
.B udr lock --cuda 12.1 --json
.TP
Cross-compile for ARM Linux
.B udr lock --target linux --platform aarch64
.TP
Sign a lock file with SLSA provenance
.B udr lock --sign --provenance
.TP
CI drift check (exit 1 if lock file is stale)
.B udr lock --check
.TP
Update manifests automatically after resolution
.B udr lock --yes
.TP
Check for CVEs in the lock file
.B udr check --cve
.TP
Check license compliance
.B udr check --license
.TP
Check deprecated packages
.B udr check --deprecated
.TP
Enforce a YAML policy
.B udr check --policy udr-policy.yaml
.TP
Fix vulnerable packages automatically
.B udr update --fix-cve
.TP
Generate an SPDX SBOM
.B udr sbom --format spdx --output bom.json
.TP
Show why flask is required (dependency chain)
.B udr why flask
.TP
Search for a package
.B udr search requests
.TP
Install all packages from the lock file
.B udr install
.TP
Install production dependencies only (skip dev)
.B udr install --production
.TP
Resolve a cross-ecosystem dependency set
.B udr resolve numpy@pypi express@npm lodash
.TP
Compare workspace lock files
.B udr diff --workspace backend
.TP
Verify lock file integrity and signature
.B udr verify --signature
.TP
Generate bash completions
.B udr completion bash > /etc/bash_completion.d/udr
.TP
Scan a GitHub repository
.B udr scan --github https://github.com/user/repo
.TP
Start the API server on port 8199
.B udr serve --port 8199
.SH ENVIRONMENT
UDR behaviour can be configured through the following environment variables.
All settings are evaluated lazily on first access, allowing configuration
changes without restart.
.SS Solver behaviour
.TP
.B SOLVER_TIMEOUT
Overall resolution timeout in seconds (default: 120). Applied per
resolution call; the solver receives 80% of this budget.
.TP
.B SOLVER_MAX_VARIABLES
Maximum number of SAT variables before the solver gives up and returns
unsatisfiable (default: 50000).
.TP
.B SOLVER_REJECT_DEPRECATED
When set to "true", deprecated or yanked packages are excluded during
resolution. When "false" (default), deprecation warnings are collected
but packages are still considered.
.TP
.B SOLVER_OPTIMIZATION_THRESHOLD
Version count above which Z3 optimization is disabled (default: 500).
When a package exceeds this many candidates, the solver falls back to a
plain SAT search with post-resolution upgrade.
.TP
.B SOLVER_PRERELEASE_PENALTY
Prerelease version penalty weight for optimization (default: 100000).
.TP
.B SOLVER_DFS_MAX_NODES
Maximum nodes visited in DFS backtracking fallback (default: 200000).
.TP
.B USE_PUBGRUB_SOLVER
Set to "true" to use the PubGrub solver (requires pubgrub-py).
Default: false.
.TP
.B USE_Z3_SOLVER
Set to "true" to force the Z3 SAT solver. Default: false (auto-detected).
.TP
.B USE_Z3_OPTIMIZE
Set to "true" to use z3.Optimize() for version preference. Default: false.
.TP
.B USE_FORKING_SOLVER
Set to "true" to enable the ForkingResolver meta-solver, which forks
parallel alternative resolution scenarios when the primary solver fails.
Default: false.
.TP
.B FORKING_MAX_FORKS
Maximum number of parallel fork attempts (default: 4).
.TP
.B FORKING_TIMEOUT_RATIO
Fraction of remaining timeout allocated to each fork (default: 0.5).
.TP
.B SOLVER_API_TIMEOUT
API endpoint resolution timeout in seconds (default: 60).
.TP
.B PEER_DEP_MODE
Peer dependency resolution mode: "hard" (default) or "soft".
.SS Caching and offline mode
.TP
.B UDR_OFFLINE
Set to "true", "1", or "yes" to disable all network requests. Only cached
data is used. Equivalent to the \fB\-\-offline\fR CLI flag.
.TP
.B PIN_INTEGRITY
Set to "true" to verify package integrity hashes (sha256/sha512/cksum)
during lock and verify operations. Default: false.
.TP
.B USE_CONTENT_CACHE
Set to "true" to enable the content-addressed cache (SHA256-addressed
blob store). Default: false.
.TP
.B INDEX_AUTO_SYNC
Set to "true" to automatically sync stale local indexes before resolution.
Default: false.
.TP
.B LOCAL_INDEX_UPDATE_INTERVAL
Seconds between automatic local index refresh attempts (default: 3600).
.TP
.B CACHE_TTL
Default cache TTL in seconds for API responses (default: 3600).
.TP
.B BFS_BATCH_SIZE
Number of dependencies fetched in parallel per batch during BFS traversal
(default: 20).
.SS Cross-compilation
.TP
.B TARGET_OS
Override target OS for cross-compilation (linux, windows, darwin).
.TP
.B TARGET_ARCH
Override target CPU architecture (x86_64, aarch64, arm64, i386, amd64).
.TP
.B TARGET_CUDA
Override target CUDA version for cross-compilation.
.SS Authentication
.TP
.BI {ECOSYSTEM}_AUTH_TOKEN
Authentication token for a specific ecosystem registry (e.g.\&
PYPI_AUTH_TOKEN, NPM_AUTH_TOKEN).
.TP
.BI {ECOSYSTEM}_AUTH_TYPE
Auth type: "bearer" (default), "basic", or "header".
.TP
.BI {ECOSYSTEM}_AUTH_USERNAME
Username for basic auth with an ecosystem registry.
.TP
.BI {ECOSYSTEM}_AUTH_PASSWORD
Password for basic auth with an ecosystem registry.
.TP
.B API_KEY
API key for the UDR API server. Auto-generated if not set.
.TP
.B SIGNING_KEY_PASSWORD
Password for the Ed25519 signing key.
.SS Network and retry
.TP
.B NPM_CONCURRENCY
Maximum concurrent NPM API requests (default: 10).
.TP
.B DETECT_ECOSYSTEMS_TIMEOUT
Timeout in seconds for ecosystem detection probes during manifest scanning
(default: 15).
.TP
.B MAX_RETRIES
Maximum number of retry attempts for failed HTTP requests (default: 3).
.TP
.B RETRY_MAX_DELAY
Maximum retry backoff delay in seconds (default: 10).
.TP
.B REQUEST_TIMEOUT
HTTP request timeout in seconds (default: 30).
.SS OpenTelemetry
.TP
.B OTEL_ENABLED
Set to "true" to enable OpenTelemetry tracing. Default: false.
.TP
.B OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT
OTLP exporter endpoint URL.
.TP
.B OTEL_SERVICE_NAME
Service name for tracing (default: universal-dependency-resolver).
.SS Server
.TP
.B UDR_PORT
API server port (default: 8199).
.TP
.B UDR_HOST
API server bind address (default: 127.0.0.1).
.TP
.B UDR_MODE
Run mode: "cli" (default) or "saas".
.TP
.B ENV
Deployment environment: "development" (default) or "production".
.TP
.B SECRET_KEY
Secret key for JWT token signing. Must be changed in production.
.TP
.B ENABLE_AUTH
Set to "true" (default) to enable authentication on the API server.
.TP
.B PROMETHEUS_ENABLED
Set to "true" to expose Prometheus metrics at /metrics. Default: false.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I udr.lock
Universal lock file (JSON). Contains the resolved dependency graph with
integrity hashes, deprecation flags, system information, provenance
metadata, and workspace labels. By convention,
\fIudr-{workspace}.lock\fR is used for monorepo workspaces.
.TP
.I udr-policy.yaml
YAML policy file for \fBudr check \-\-policy\fR. Supports rules for
blocked packages, allowed licenses, deprecated/yanked rejection,
vulnerability thresholds, mandatory transitive pinning, and vendor
requirements.
.TP
.I ~/.config/udr/
User configuration directory.
.RS
.TP
.I keys/
Ed25519 signing key pair (\fIudr_ed25519\fR, \fIudr_ed25519.pub\fR) for
lock file attestation, generated by \fBudr auth gen-key\fR.
.TP
.I config.toml
Optional user preferences file (environment variables take precedence).
.RE
.TP
.I ~/.cache/udr/
Cache directory for API responses, offline indexes, and content-
addressed blob storage.
.RS
.TP
.I indexes/
SQLite offline indexes for air-gapped resolution.
.TP
.I {ecosystem}/
Per-ecosystem JSON response caches (DictCache with debounced flush).
.TP
.I cac/
Content-addressed cache blobs (SHA256-addressed, git-like sharding).
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
Successful completion.
.TP
1
General error, policy violation, or lock file drift detected
(\fBudr lock \-\-check\fR).
.TP
2
Invalid command line syntax or arguments.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs and feature requests at
.B https://github.com/anomalyco/universal-dependency-resolver/issues
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR udr.lock (5),
.BR udr-policy.yaml (5),
.BR pip (1),
.BR npm (1),
.BR cargo (1),
.BR go (1)
